[WIP] Contributing a feature to Galaxy core hands-on tutorial (#2564)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: "Contributing to Galaxy Core"
questions:
 - How can I develop extensions to Galaxy data model?
 - How can I implement new API functionality within Galaxy?
 - How can I extend the Galaxy user interface with VueJS components?
objectives:

> time_estimation: "180M"

Reviewer: You can use e.g `3H` here as well

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

> title: "Contributing to Galaxy Core"

Reviewer 2: I wonder whether this should be more specific, like "Contributing a Feature to Galaxy Core"? The other core tutorial is "Debugging Galaxy" - which is also contributing (via fixing bugs and writing tests). But maybe it's fine as is.

questions:
 - How can I develop extensions to Galaxy data model?
 - How can I implement new API functionality within Galaxy?
 - How can I extend the Galaxy user interface with VueJS components?
objectives:
time_estimation: "3H"
contributors:
 - jmchilton
key_points:
 - Galaxy database interactions are mitigated via SQL Alchemy code in lib/galaxy/model.
 - Galaxy API endpoints are implemented in lib/galaxy/webapps/galaxy, but generally defer to application logic in lib/galaxy/managers. 
 - Galaxy client code should do its best to separate API interaction logic from display components.
requirements:
  -
    type: "internal"
    topic_name: contributing
    tutorials:
        - github-command-line-contribution
  -
    type: "internal"
    topic_name: dev

>     tutorials:
>         - architecture
> ---

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    tutorials:
        - architecture
    subtopic: core
---
```

# Contributing to Galaxy Core 

This tutorial walks you through an extension to Galaxy and how to contribute back to the core project.

> To setup the proposed extension imagine you're running a specialized Galaxy server and each of your users only use a few of Galaxy datatypes. You'd like to tailor the UI experience by allowing user's of Galaxy to select their favorite extensions for additional filtering in downstream applications, UI extensions, etc..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To setup the proposed extension imagine you're running a specialized Galaxy server and each of your users only use a few of Galaxy datatypes. You'd like to tailor the UI experience by allowing users of Galaxy to select their favorite extensions for additional filtering in downstream applications, UI extensions, etc..
```

> Like many extensions to Galaxy, the proposed change requires persistent state. Galaxy stores most persistent state in its relational database. The Python layer that defines Galaxy data model is setup by defining SQL Alchemy models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Like many extensions to Galaxy, the proposed change requires persistent state. Galaxy stores most persistent state in a relational database. The Python layer that defines Galaxy data model is setup by defining SQLAlchemy models.
```

> The proposed extension could be implemented several different ways on Galaxy's backend and we will choose one for this example for its simplicity not for its correctness or cleverness, because our purpose here to demonstrate modifying and extending various layers of Galaxy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The proposed extension could be implemented in several different ways on Galaxy's backend. We will choose one for this example for its simplicity, not for its correctness or cleverness, because our purpose here is to demonstrate modifying and extending various layers of Galaxy.
```

> With simplicity in mind, we will implement our proposed extension to Galaxy by adding a single new table to Galaxy's data model called ``user_favorite_extension``. The concept of a favorite extension will be represented by a one-to-many relationship from the table that stores Galaxy's user records to this new table. The extension itself that will be favorited will be stored as a ``Text`` field in this new table. This table will also need to include a integer primary key named ``id`` to follow the example set by the rest of the Galaxy data model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With simplicity in mind, we will implement our proposed extension to Galaxy by adding a single new table to Galaxy's data model called ``user_favorite_extension``. The concept of a favorite extension will be represented by a one-to-many relationship from the table that stores Galaxy's user records to this new table. The extension itself that will be favorited will be stored as a ``Text`` field in this new table. This table will also need to include an integer primary key named ``id`` to follow the example set by the rest of the Galaxy data model.
```

The relational database tables consumed by Galaxy are defined in ``lib/galaxy/model/mapping.py``.

> ### {% icon question %} Questions about Mapping
>

> > 1. What should the SQL Alchemy model named corresponding to the table ``user_favorite_extension`` based on other examples in the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> 1. What should be the SQLAlchemy model named corresponding to the table ``user_favorite_extension`` based on other examples in the file?
```

> 2. What table stores Galaxy's user records?
> 3. What is another simple table with a relationship with the Galaxy's user table?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > 1. ``UserFavoriteExtension`` 
> > 2. ``galaxy_user``
> > 3. An example table might be the ``user_preference`` table.
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

> Implement the required changes ``mapping.py`` to add a mapping for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implement the required changes in ``mapping.py`` to add a mapping for
```

the proposed ``user_favorite_extension`` table.

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/mapping.py_diff.md %}

The Python model objects used by Galaxy corresponding to these tables are
defined in ``lib/galaxy/model/__init__.py``.

Modify ``lib/galaxy/model/__init__.py`` to add a model class
called ``UserFavoriteExtension`` as described above.

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/__init__.py_diff.md %}

There is one last database issue to consider before moving on to considering the API.
Each successive release of Galaxy requires recipes for how to migrate old database schemes

> to updated ones. These recipes are called versions and currently implemented using SQL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to updated ones. These recipes are called versions and are currently implemented using SQLAlchemy
```

> Alchemy migrate. These versions are stored in ``lib/galaxy/model/migrate``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Migrate. These versions are stored in ``lib/galaxy/model/migrate``.
```

> Each of these versions is prefixed with a number 4 digit (e.g. ``0125``) to specify the linear

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each of these versions is prefixed with a 4-digit number (e.g. ``0125``) to specify the linear
```

order these migrations should be applied in.

> We've devloped a lot of abstractions around the underlying migration library we use, so it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've developed a lot of abstractions around the underlying migration library we use, so it
```

is probably better to find existing examples inside of Galaxy for writing migrations than

> consulting the SQL Alchemy Migrate documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consulting the SQLAlchemy Migrate documentation.
```

A good example for the table we need to construct for this example is again based on the existing
user preferences concept in Galaxy.

> ### {% icon question %} Questions about Migrations
>
> 1. What existing Galaxy migration added the concept of user preferences to the Galaxy codebase?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > 1. ``lib/galaxy/model/migrate/versions/0021_user_prefs.py``
> {: .solution }
{: .question }

Add a new file to ``lib/galaxy/model/migrate/versions/`` prefixed appropriately.

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/0177_add_user_favorite_extensions.py_diff.md %}

With the database model in place, we need to start adding the rest of

> the Python plubming required to implement this feature. We will do

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the Python plumbing required to implement this feature. We will do
```

this with a test-driven approach and start by implementing an API test
that exercises operations we would like to have available for favorite
extensions.

We will stick a test case for user extensions in
``lib/galaxy_test/api/test_users.py`` which is a relatively

> straight-forward file that contains tests for other user API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
straightforward file that contains tests for other user API
```

endpoints.

> Various user centered operations have endpoints under

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Various user-centered operations have endpoints under
```
Also, this sentence sounds confusing - is there something missing? (I may be wrong though)

``api/user/<user_id>`` and ``api/user/current`` is sometimes
substituable as the current user.

We will keep things very simple and only implement this functionality
for the current user.

> We will implement three very API endpoints.

Reviewer 2: very simple? basic?

Author: Yes, thanks - replaced "very" with just "simple".

```

Add a new API implementation file to
``lib/galaxy/webapps/galaxy/api/`` called ``user_favorites.py`` with
an API implementation of the endpoints we just outlined.

To implement the API itself, add three methods to the user manager in
``lib/galaxy/managers/users.py``.

- ``get_favorite_extensions(user)``
- ``add_favorite_extension(user, extension)``
- ``delete_favorite_extension(user, extension)``

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/user_favorites.py_diff.md %}

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/users.py_diff.md %}

This part is relatively challenging and takes time to really become an
expert at - it requires greping around the backend to find similar examples,
lots of trial and error, debugging the test case and the implementation in unison,
etc..

Ideally, you'd start at the top of test case - make sure it fails on the first API request,
implement ``get_favorite_extensions`` on the manager and the API code to wire it up, and continue
with ``add_favorite_extension`` before finishing with ``delete_favorite_extension``.

```
./run_tests.sh -api lib/galaxy_test/api/test_users.py::UsersApiTestCase::test_favorite_extensions
```

> Once the API test is done, it is time to build a user interface for this addition to Galaxy. Lets get

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the API test is done, it is time to build a user interface for this addition to Galaxy. Let's get
```

some of the plumbing out of the way right away. We'd like to have a URL for viewing the current user's
favorite extensions in the UI. This URL needs to be registered as a client route in ``lib/galaxy/webapps/galaxy/buildapp.py``.

> Add ``/user/favorite/extensions`` as a route for the client in ``buildapp.py.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add ``/user/favorite/extensions`` as a route for the client in ``buildapp.py``.
```

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/buildapp.py_diff.md %}

Let's add the ability to navigate to this URL and future component to
the "User" menu in the Galaxy masthead. The file ``client/src/layout/menu.js``
contains the "model" data describing the masthead. Add a link to the route

> we described above to ``menu.js`` with a entry titled "Favorite Extensions".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we described above to ``menu.js`` with an entry titled "Favorite Extensions".
```

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/menu.js_diff.md %}

> The next piece of this plumbing is to respond to this route the

Reviewer 2: something is missing here. Respond **in** the analysis router?

Author: Yes - you're right - thanks for the detailed review!

analysis router. The analysis router maps URLs to UI components to
render.

Assume a VueJS component will be available called
``FavoriteExtensions`` in the file
``components/User/FavoriteExtensions/index.js``.  In
``client/src/entry/analysis/AnalysisRouter.js`` respond to the route
added above in ``buildapp.py`` and render the fictious VueJS component
``FavoriteExtensions``.

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/AnalysisRouter.js_diff.md %}

There are many ways to perform the next steps, but like the API entry-point lets
start with a test case describing the UI component we want to write. Below is a
Jest unit test for a VueJS component that mocks out some API calls to ``/api/datatypes``
and the API entry points we implemented earlier and renders an editable list of
extensions based on it.

{% include topics/dev/tutorials/core-contributing/List.test.js_diff.md %}

> Sketching out this unit test would take a lot of practice, this a step

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sketching out this unit test would take a lot of practice, this is a step
```
